---
title: Notes on Domain-Driven Design with Java — A Practitioner’s Guide
date: 2022-02-01
---

<h1>The Rationale for DDD </h1>
<h2>Excessive Incidental Complexity</h2>
 <ul>
  <li>The testing ice cream cone is a classic case of what Fred Brooks calls incidental complexity in his seminal paper titled No Silver Bullet — Essence and Accident in Software Engineering </li>
  <li>However, incidental or accidental complexity is not directly attributable to the problem itself — but is caused by limitations of the people involved, their skill levels, the tools and/or abstractions being used</li>
 </ul> 

<h2>Uncontrolled Technical Debt</h2>
 <ul>
   <li>Technical debt is what results when development teams take arguably sub-optimal actions to expedite the delivery of a set of features or projects. For a period of time, just like borrowed money allows you to do things sooner than you could otherwise, technical debt can result in short term speed</li>
   <li>value- adding functional features, can lead to unusable systems — and subsequently failure.</li>
 </ul>


<h1>Modern Systems and dealing with complexity</h1>
<h2>How software get built</h2>
<ul>
<li>Before we express a solution in working code, it is necessary to understand what the problem entails, why the problem is important to solve, and finally, how it can be solved.</li>
<li>The delivery pipeline enables us to put software in the hands of our customers, whereas the feedback pipeline allows us to adjust and adapt. As we can see, this is a continuum. And if we are to build better, more valuable software, this continuum, this potentially infinite loop has to be optimized!</li>
</ul>

<h1>What is DDD</h1>
<ul>
<li>When encountered with a complex business problem:
<p>
Understand the problem: To have a deep, shared understanding of the problem, it is necessary for business experts and technology experts to collaborate closely. Here we collectively understand what the problem is and why it is valuable to solve. This is termed as the domain for the problem.<br/>
2. Break down the problem into more manageable parts: To keep complexity at manageable levels, break down complex problems into smaller, independently solvable parts. These parts are termed as subdomains. It may be necessary to further break down subdomains where the subdomain is still too complex. Assign explicit boundaries to limit the functionality of each subdomain. This boundary is termed as the bounded context for that subdomain. It may also be convenient to think of the subdomain as a concept that makes more sense to the domain experts (in the problem space), whereas the bounded context is a concept that makes more sense to the technology experts (in the solution space).<br/>
3. For each of these bounded contexts:<br/>
a. Agree on a shared language: Formalize the understanding by establishing a shared language that is applicable unambiguously within the bounds of the subdomain. This shared language is termed as the ubiquitous language of the domain.<br/>
b. Express understanding in shared models: In order to produce working software, express the ubiquitous language in the form of shared models. This model is termed as the domain model. There may exist multiple variations of this model, each meant to clarify a specific aspect of the solution. For example, a process model, a sequence diagram, working code, a deployment topology, etc.<br/>
4. Embrace incidental complexity of the problem: It is important to note that it is not possible to shy away from the essential complexity of a given problem. By breaking down the problem into subdomains and bounded contexts, we are attempting to distribute it (more or less) evenly across more manageable parts.<br/>
5. Continuously evolve for greater insight: It is important to understand that the above steps are not a one-time activity. Businesses, technologies, processes and our understanding of these evolve, it is important for our shared understanding to remain in sync with these models through continuous refactoring.<br/>
</p>
</li>
</ul>


<h1>What is Domain </h1>
<p>In the context of a business however, the word domain covers the overall scope of its primary activity — the service it provides to its customers. This is also referred as the problem domain.For example, Tesla operates in the domain of electric vehicles, Netflix provides online movies and shows, while McDonald’s provides fast food. Some companies like Amazon, provide services in more than one domain — online retail, cloud computing, among others. The domain of a business (at least the successful ones) almost always encompasses fairly complex and abstract concepts. To cope with this complexity, it is usual to decompose these domains into more manageable pieces called subdomains.</p>

<h1>what is subdomain</h1>
<ul>
<li>Engineers do this by breaking down complex problems into more manageable ones called subdomains.This facilitates better understanding and makes it easier to arrive at a solution.</li>
<li>In certain businesses, subdomains themselves may turn out to become very complex on their own and may require further decomposition.</li>
<li>Domain decomposition is an important aspect of DDD</li>
<li>
<p>following three types of subdomains are going to be encountered<br/>
Core: The main focus area for the business. This is what provides the biggest differentiation and value. It is therefore natural to want to place the most focus on the core subdomain. In the retail example above, shopping cart and orders might be the biggest differentiation — and hence may form the core subdomains for that business venture. It is prudent to implement core subdomains in-house given that it is something that businesses will desire to have the most control over. In the online retail example above, the business may want to focus on providing an enriched experience to place online orders. This will make the online orders and shopping cart part of the core subdomain<br/>
Supporting: Like with every great movie, where it is not possible to create a masterpiece without a solid supporting cast, so it is with supporting or auxiliary subdomains. Supporting subdomains are usually very important and very much required, but may not be the primary focus to run the business. These supporting subdomains, while necessary to run the business, do not typically offer a significant competitive advantage. Hence, it might be even fine to completely outsource this work or use an off-the-shelf solution as is or with minor tweaks. For the retail example above, assuming that online ordering is the primary focus of this business, catalog management may be a supporting subdomain<br/>
Generic: When working with business applications, one is required to provide a set of capabilities not directly related to the problem being solved. Consequently, it might suffice to just make use of an off-the-shelf solution. For the retail example above, the identity, auditing and activity tracking subdomains might fall in that category.<br/></p>
</li>
<li>Over a period of time, it is only natural that competitors will attempt to emulate your successes. Newer, more efficient methods will arise, reducing the complexity involved, disrupting your core. This may cause the notion of what is currently core, to shift and become a supporting or generic capability</li>
</ul>
